# Running Tests

## Running tests

There are a bunch of ways to verify your changes to Ruby after you've build the
binary. Which one you'll use will depend on where you're working in the
codebase, and how quickly you need feedback.

From fastest (least coverage) to slowest (most coverage), these are:

- `make btest` requires `miniruby`. ~1400 tests, ~50 seconds on my mac.
- `make test` requires full `ruby` and runs a test suite. ~1400 tests, ~60
  seconds on my Macbook.
- `make test-all` requires full `ruby`, 20k tests, ~20 minutes.

## Running specific tests

You can run selected test files using make directly. It will run the tests in
the order you specify

```
make path/to/test/file.rb path/to/another/test.rb
```

## TESTOPTS and RUN_OPTS

You can configure what `make` runs by setting some environment variables. When
you run the tests `make` builds a command to run that consists broadly of three
parts: A ruby interpreter, a wrapper script to run ruby with a set
configuration, and a test runner that calls the ruby wrapper script to run tests
with the specified ruby configuration. Each level can be modified:

* `TESTS` - the list of tests to run
* `TESTOPTS` - the options to pass through to the test runner
* `RUNRUBYOPT` - the options to pass through to the wrapper script
* `RUN_OPTS` - the options to pass through the the underlying `ruby` command

I have no idea where to find a comprehensive list of what options can be used, I
suspect that I'll be discovering new things forever. But here is a useful
command pulled from my shell history:

```
make test-all TESTOPTS="-v --seed=7791" RUNRUBYOPT="--debugger=lldb"
```

This says: run all the tests in single threaded mode (`-v`), in a specific order
(`--seed`) and using the `lldb` debugger, so I can step through a crash.

## Excluded tests

Ruby excludes some tests from all runs, whether locally or on Github Actions CI.
You can see this whenever you run the tests and it shows the following run
command

```
❯ make test-all
Run options:
  --seed=59041
  "--ruby=./miniruby -I./lib -I. -I.ext/common  ./tool/runruby.rb --extout=.ext  -- --disable-gems"
  --excludes-dir=./test/excludes
  --name=!/memory_leak/
```

The last part `--name=!/memory_leak/` is the interesting part - Ruby doesn't run
any test containing `memory_leak` in it's name by default! If you're actually
trying to run (or write) the memory leak tests you can clear the excludes list
using `TEST_EXCLUDES`

```
make test/ruby/test_class.rb TEST_EXCLUDES=""
```

You can also Run tests using the debugger [[debugging]]


[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[debugging]: debugging "Debugging"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"